# Data description
Soil health is a holistic concept that encompasses a combination of several different dynamic soil properties (DSPs). The specific DSPs used vary among research groups, but this project will employ those recommended by NRCS. Lab measurements will be soil organic carbon, wet aggregate stability, soil respiration, enzyme activity, active carbon, available organic nitrogen, and microbial community structure. In the field, prior to sampling, there will be an onsite soil health assessment using the Willamette Valley Soil Quality Card. This assessment is a more qualitative technique, but it is inexpensive and more practical for growers to use on their own fields. Overall, these data should provide information about how well the soil is providing ecosystem services (such as nutrient cycling) and supporting soil biota. 

This data set consists almost entirely of spreadsheets of quantitative data. The Soil Quality Card will contain qualitative data (short descriptions, rating soil quality in different indicators). All of these data are observational. The data will be collected according to the methods provided by the NRCS. The Willamette Valley data set will eventually be combined with data sets from other universities working on their regional projects, so it is important that all the research groups follow the same protocols. 

# Roles and responsibilities

Soil sampling and data collection will be primarily carried out by the PhD student, with occasional assistance from an undergraduate research assistant. An NRCS representative will provide training on standardized soil collection and field description procedures, and will work collaboratively with the PhD student and the PI to carry out sampling, prior to lab work. A second NRCS representative will provide standard lab methods to collect those data, and the PhD student will carry out the provided protocols. It will be the PhD student's responsibility to check for instrument quality control and assurance, including routine maintenance. The PI will provide training/resources on appropriate maintenance and assurance on these particular machines. More serious repairs will be addressed by a specialist, and coordinated by the PI. 

The PhD student will be the data manager responsible for organization and short term storage of all lab results and field metadata. The undergraduate research assistant will be responsible for storing any data they collected in the same location (a shared folder on the OSU S: drive), format, and naming conventions as data collected by the PhD student. NRCS Representative 2 is responsible for organization of field soil health assessments, and for transferring them to NRCS Representative 1. The PhD student will work with NRCS Representative 1 to coordinate transfer of the lab and field data to their care for storage in the “USDA cloud vault”.  
Data analysis will be primarily performed by the PhD student, with assistance/supervision from the PI and consultation as needed with the OSU Statistics Consulting Service.

NRCS Representative 1 will also coordinate making the data publically available and discoverable after collection and analysis, via an online database. Preservation of the data will be carried out by NRCS technical experts, after it is turned over to NRCS Representative 1. It will be archived in a data repository, along with the data from the other projects.

# Data standards and metadata

All of the data will be numerical measurements recorded in spreadsheets, most of which will be generated by lab tests. Data will be stored as .csv files for the quantitative data.  Qualitative data, from the in field soil health assessments will also be stored in .csv files as spreadsheets.

All data sets will be described with the following metadata categories, based on the Environmental Information Data Centre (EIDC) Guidelines (http://eidc.ceh.ac.uk/deposit/supportingDocumentation). While the EIDC does not have a metadata standard associated with these guidelines, they do provide a helpful framework to organize important metadata. Metadata will be stored as a plain text file.

* Contact information for project members at OSU and NRCS. Orcid numbers will be provided where available. 
* A brief description of the data being described
* Experimental design/sampling regime (including sample plot GPS location and site description information)  
* Collection Methods  
* Fieldwork and laboratory instrumentation  
   + Calibration steps and values  
   + Quality control and assurance methods  
* Data dictionary: Nature and units of recorded values (including corresponding column names, units, definitions)  
* Analytical Methods (statistical analysis, calculations)  
* Details of data structure (how data is organized into different files and folders)  


# Storage and security

## Storage

During the collection and analysis phase, data will be stored in three places and updated daily with an automatic backup system. 
1. On a local computer at Oregon State (working copy).  
* Data will be stored here until the PhD student leaves the university, approximately 3 years after project completion.
2. On the shared research drive hosted by the Oregon State University Department of Crop and Soil Science (master copy and original raw data)  
* Data will be stored here for at least 5 years after project completion 
* This drive is backed up daily on to other servers.
3. On an institutional folder on Box (master copy) 
* The institutional folder will allow this copy to be kept after project members have left the university. 
* The university has not published guidelines on how long they will keep this data on Box. 
4. Following initial analysis, data will also be stored on the USDA CloudVault, and ultimately on an online website.
* NRCS intends to keep a copy of this data on the CloudVault (or on a similar repository) indefinitely, and will archive the data offline for longterm storage.

## Backup

Storage locations 1, 2 and 3 above describe the locations where backups of the data will live during analysis. There will be 3 copies of the master copy throughout, including the original raw data, and data representing significant milestones (work that would take more than 2 hours to recover). Git will be used to track changes on the local working copy.  To automate the backup process, a commonly recommended tool, CrashPlan. CrashPlan can coordinate automated backup into both the shared drive folder and to the institutional folder on Box (via Box's desktop application). The shared folder is archived nightly by the Department of Crop and Soil Science. 

# Access and data sharing
None of the data concern personally identifiable information or human subjects. Additionally, none of the data will contain information that needs to be kept confidential for other reasons. Therefore, all data and associated metadata will be shared on the NRCS Soil Health page, and accessible by the public. Data spreadsheets will be made available as .csv files to make them accessible by the most users. Because the Willamette Valley study is part of a larger project, involving 9 other soil health studies throughout the U.S., shared data will be combined into a larger master spreadsheet including data from the other studies. This compilation will allow greater opportunity for analyzing the scope and variability of the study results. It also means that the database, in its final form, will not be shared until all projects have finished collecting data. It is estimated that data will be shared by the end of 2020. Barring unforeseen delays, the Willamette Valley data is expected to be available by October, 2019. All data will be available under the public domain (CC O License), redistribution, reuse and creation of derivatives are allowed. 

# Archiving and preservation
As with previous projects (such as the U.S. Soil Survey), NRCS will preserve the database as long as possible, keeping the sharing site open. The PI will also retain backup copies locally. A copy will be kept on the department research drive (which is backed up nightly), and the copy kept on Box in an institutional drive will provide additional security that the data will be preserved. Although there are no plans to deliberately clear out the data from these folders, it is expected that it will be preserved here for at least 5 years after project completion (2025) for possible additional analysis or incorporation into other projects. After that, data will be accessible    from the NRCS repository as needed. 
